---
id: e22dd5a3-f940-4548-b1d7-22a26b5386ce
title: Ch4 - Encoding and evolution
desc: ''
updated: 1604294873457
created: 1604260691239
parent: a42eba1d-b978-4cdc-9160-1f3e9c7cf025
children: []
fname: books.tech.data-intensive-applications.ch4-encoding
hpath: books.tech.data-intensive-applications.ch4-encoding
---
# Chapter 4: Encoding and evolution

- **Backward compatibility**: Newer code can read data that was written by older code.
- **Forward compatibility**: Older code can read data that was written by newer code.

## Formats of encoding

### Lang specific format

- Tied to a particular langaguage
- Security concern - decoding process needs to be able to instantiate arbitrary classes 
- Versioning is after thought

### JSON, XML, CSV

- Usually good choice for comm between organizations
- Problems:
  - ambiguity around the encoding of numbers. 
    - e.g. large numbers - integers greater than 2^53 cannot be exactly represented  in floating point in javascript
  - Lack support for binary string - base64 enciding as workaround. -- increase data size by 33%
  - Schema support not widely used. Decoding logic needs hardcoding

### Binary format

- Benefits 
  - More compact (JSON etc. needs to be self describing. Lots of space used in each record)
  - The **schema is a valuable form of documentation**  
  - **Keeping a database of schemas** allows you to check forward and backward compatibility of schema changes, before anything is deployed. 
    - **Code gen for static typed languages**
- **Apach Thrift** (originally Facebook) and **ProtoBuf** (ori. Google)
  - example Protobuf schema
    ```
    message Person {
        required string user_name       = 1;
        optional int64  favorite_number = 2;
        repeated string interests       = 3;
    } 
    ```
  - Field tags and schema evolution 
    - Each field contain the tag number and value
    - Tag number can't change
    - Protobuf has no list type, but `repeated` flag - can evolve from single to repeated 
    - Thrift has dedicated list type => supports nested lists
- **Avro** - designed for hadoop
  - No reference to field tag
  - Record appear in order
  - **Translate between The writer’s schema and the reader’s schema**
  - To maintain compatibility, you must only add or remove a field that has a **default value** 
  - how to find writer schema: different options 
    - Large file with lots of records  - include the writer’s schema once at the beginning of the large  file 
    - Version number + database to look up schema
    - Negotiate version on connection setup - AVRO RPC 
  - Benefit: 
    - Support dynamically generated schemas  - e.g. no need to hardcode translation between DB columns and schema if doing a dump
    - Code generation and dynamically typed languages - Thrift and Protocol Buffers rely on code generation, not great for dynamic lang. In Avro code gen is optional - for dynamic type, can read directly

#### The Merits of Schemas

- Many DBs proprietary binary encoding: JDBC/ODBC driver can decode responses from the DBs’s network protocol into in-memory data structures. 
- Thrift, Protobuf and Avro all support schema, but simpler than XML or json (e.g. regex constraints)

## Modes of dataflow

### Through Databases

- Backward compatibility is clearly necessary: same client, newer version needs to read older writes
- Forward compatibility is also needed: newer client writes a record, a older client reads
- Common error: newer client adds a field, older client update the row, that unknown field get dropped-- if it can't parse new field, should keep as-is 
- Data outlives code: App updates fast. Data from a long time ago is still stored 
  - Schema evolution thus allows the entire database to appear as if it was encoded with a single schema, even though the underlying storage may contain records encoded with various historical versions of the schema. 
- Archival storage:
  - data dump will typically be encoded using the latest schema 
  - Avro object container often good fit - or parquet for analytic friendliness 

### Through Services: REST and RPC

- REST is not a protocol, but rather a design philosophy that builds upon the principles of HTTP - "REST-ful"
  - URL as resource
  - HTTP features for cache control, authentication, and content type negotiation 
  - it doesn’t try to hide the fact that it’s a network protocol
- SOAP: 
  - avoid HTTP specific features
  - WSDL enables code generation so that a client can access a remote service using local classes and method calls  - not as useful for dynamically typed languages
- problems with RPCs pretending to be local calls - is flawed idea: 
  - Unpredictable, may require retry
  - may not know whether succeeded or failed (in case of timeout) 
  - Retry and idempotence - request may be going through but didn't get successful response
  - Latency longer
  - Passing data
- REST is usually used for external comm, RPC may be internal
- Evolution:
  - can assume all the servers will be updated first, and all the clients second -> only need backward compatibility on requests, and forward compatibility on responses. 
  - REST api provider can store client APIs + version they are requesting to help manage. E.g. [stripe](https://stripe.com/docs/upgrades)
    - Thrift, gRPC (Protocol Buffers), and Avro RPC can be evolved according to the compatibility rules of the respective encoding format

### Message-Passing Dataflow

- **Actor programming model**: communicates by send/receiving async messages. process one message at a time. assume message may be lost 
- Compared to RPC, less mismatch between local vs remote communication 
- example distributed actor frameworks: message broker + actor programming model
  - Akka - Java’s built-in serialization by default -> no fw/bw compatibility. supports using with ProtoBuf etc. to do rolling upgrades
  - Orleans - also support custom serailization plug-ins 
  - Erlang OTP  

